bolo'bolo
by p.m.

semiotext(e)

"Apology," a decade later

According to the Provisional Schedule in the first
English printing of _bolo'bolo_ we should now all be
living happily in _bolos_, traveling around the planet
zwithout credit cards or passports, enjoying hospitality
everywhere, working some, playing some, sleeping some
and not worrying about anything.  Nation-states, armies,
big companies, 9-to-5 jobs, poverty, hunger, car traffic,
environmental pollution, etc., should be no more than dim
memories of a past age of stupidity and mutual fear.  No
such monsters as the USA, Russia or China should exist
any more, but a patchwork of intentional regions (sumi) of
maybe ten million inhabitants and the size of
Pennsylvania largely self-sufficient.  Instead of nations
there should be criss-cross cooperation between these
regions, worldwide.

Now, if we look at the real early '90s, we couldn't be
farther off schedule.  Not only hasn't the Planetary Work
Machine (or economy -- state, private or mixed --  as
some prefer to call it) not dissolved, it's kicking and
alive, killing to the left and to the right, imposing still
lower levels of misery.  We are further away from any
conceivable Utopia than ever.  Instead of paradise, 1991
brought us one of the most cynical wars ever (or shall
we call it a punitive expedition?) to ensure that energy
prices remain "reasonable" and under control.  The Gulf
War has proved once more that the Planetary Work
Machine is really _one_ Machine, not limited by nations,
ideologies or property-systems.  Energy, the blood of the
Machine, is too vital to play funny games.  The divisions
(race, nation, wages, sex) are ours, not the Machine's.

Sure, the three Deals (A,B,C) are still in crisis, and
this crisis has visibly deepened.  In this respect, some of
my predictions of 1983 turned out quite correct.  (You're
always right in predicting bad things, never when doing
the opposite.)  Of course there are more than just three
types of deals between the Machine and us; reality is
infinitely more complex.  Actually, the use of computers
has allowed the Machine to create and manage an "individual"
deal for almost everybody.  So the A,B,C deals
are to be taken as simplified models, roughly corresponding
to the amount of capital invested per worker
("organic composition," as we Marxists sometimes say).

So, a C-deal worker uses thousands of dollars, 10^3, a
B-worker from tens to hundreds of thousands, 10^4-5, a C-
worker, millions, 10^6.  According to their responsibilities
(or risks for the Machine), qualifications, wages, pres-
tige and lifestyle are tuned.  The same holds for political
systems (or procedures of legitimation):  the higher the
organic composition in a given area is, the more
"democracy" and "human rights" you're liable to get.
You're not going to frustrate workers with dictators and
random arrests, if they can ruin equipment worth mil-
lions of dollars by just turning the "wrong" switch in a
fit of "human error"...  (We should keep such business-
like considerations in mind when we talk about lofty
ideals like freedom, democracy, rights and guarantees.)

Talking about deals in crisis, the most striking collapse
in the decade since I first wrote _bolo'bolo_ has occurred in
what I call the B-deal:  the classic industrial-worker deal,
in certain areas managed in the form of socialism.  The
concept of an average organic-composition deal with
"Taylorized" exploitation via relative surplus-value
(productivity linked to worker's performance) seems to
be definitely "out."  Mass workers -- thousands of peo-
ple holding the same jobs and doing comparable chores
-- have proved to be too strong to be submitted to
increasing levels of output.  After having been a low-
wage colony for A-deal regions, Eastern europe became
a liability for the Machine.

_Perestroika_ and other palliative operations of read-
justment couldn't bring the workers back to real work.
So bankruptcy or self-devaluation is the only weapon
left to liquidate a blocked situation.  The new strategy
seems to consist of "special economic zones," a form of
A-deal pockets within "bankrupt" B-deal areas, that
could utilize the accumulated cheap human capital (a
Russian monthly wage corresponds to $12 at the
moment I write this) and infrastructure of socialism.
(This would be similar to the Japanese or Italian models,
where the big companies with their "guaranteed work-
ers" feed on thousands of low-wage sub-contractor
firms.)

The dissolution of the classic B-deal doesn't mean that
industrial production disappears or becomes unimportant.
On the one side, industrial production is robotized and
computerized:  no job is comparable to another, and the link
between physical work and actual output is indirect.  On the
other hand, low technological work (including cleaning,
repairing and maintenance) is geographically or organiza-
tionally separated from end-production and submitted to
conditions similar to what I call the C-deal (largely
female, marginal work).  The B-deal -- of medium-high
organic composition in medium-large production units
paying medium "decent" wages to feed average work-
ing-class families participating in a regular modern
lifestyle -- is being dismantled as well in the West as in
the East.  While it's called Thatcherism or "de-industrial-
ization" in the West and is treated as a purely "econom-
ic" affair, it appears as a real "change of system" in the
East.

It seems that the B-deal will be pulverized between a
few workers joining the A-deal and many more falling
back to the manifold miseries of old and new C-deals.  In
the meantime B-workers are still there, fighting in many
forms, from Brazil to South Korea, from Poland to
China.

The current melt-down of socialism is analogous in
many ways to the Chernobyl accident of 1986.  The reac-
tor got essentially out of control, because it was deprived
of its cooling system.  the crew was playing frustrated
macho-games and tried to run the reactor much below
security levels, in the same way you violate speed limits
in a sports car.  In the same fashion, the socialist factory-
state had no extra cooling system, economy and politics
being in the same basket.  Any economic failure became
another blow to political legitimation, which in turn was
completely worn out by the mid-eighties.  Unlike in the
West -- where you can blame, alternately, politicians _or_
the economy if there is a recession or there isn't enough
money for social programs -- all evils concentrated on
the one and same elite until the social reactor got out of
control.  Seemingly solid states like East Germany, with
a very effective police apparatus, disintegrated miracu-
lously over night.  The collapse of the regimes didn't
mean a collapse of the Machine anywhere though, just a
change of the type of management, a psychologically
more refined way of running it.  The one thing we can
learn from this experience is, however, that if we are
capable of undermining ("_substructing_") the Machine 
thoroughly in one place, we don't have to worry too
much about police or military repression.  The experi-
ences of Eastern Europe show that the concept of armed 
revolutionary struggle is out-dated, ridiculous and
unnecessary, at least in industrially advanced areas.
Social mass sabotage is much more effective.

At least as spectacular as the collapse of the B-deal is
the failure of any attempts to create "development" for
the areas I summed up under the C-deal (the planet's
South).  In most parts of Africa, average incomes went
down during the eighties.  Via IMF policies, repression
and starvation became more brutal everywhere.  A new
wave of epidemics like cholera and AIDS was made pos-
sible by a complete neglect of medical and social infra-
structures.  The ultimate collapse of the illusions of
development has spurred ever more desperate flows of
emigration towards Europe or within the South.  The
attack on the remaining possibilities of subsistence
farming has been engineered with droughts, civil war
and deportations.  A "New Enclosure" of formerly com-
munal land is under way, driving farmers into cities and
converting good lands into plantations for cash crops
(exportation).  In some regions the refusal of the C-deal
has grown into mass movements for the refusal of all
deals of "Western Civilization" as a whole.  Some of
these movements try to use ideological expressions of
former stages of the (patriarchal) Machine, and link
themselves to "Islamic fundamentalism."  It is apparent
though, that these movements really care little about
Islam, and that they're social and not religious move-
ments.  Islam just stands for the concept of "cultural
identity" ("nima?") that must still be found autonomous-
ly by the movement.  What we see is just a religiously-
styled elite (mostly trained in U.S. universities) trying to
transform the fundamental refusal into a source of ener-
gy for an "Islamic state" or a phantasmatic "Islamic
economy."  Iran is already in a final stage of this kind of
manipulation, and there are now the first "Islamic fun-
damentalist revolts" against the Islamic state of the aya-
tollahs...  The ferocity of the U.S. attack against
Saddam Hussein can be explained by the fact, that he
(undeservedly, of course) had become the champion
of "fundamentalist" refusals of all deals, from
Indonesia to Morocco and even Trinidad.  The Gulf
War was the first war waged explicitly against all
those who refuse deals... including the A-deal.  And
now there are others...

(The fact that there are deals doesn't mean that they
were ever _accepted_.  They just represent forms of social
armistice in certain phases of struggle against the
Machine as such.)

Even the "best" deal, offered to about ten percent (600
million persons) of the Machine's workers, the A-deal of
modern consumer society, is no longer what it used to
be.  Wages in the classic A-deal country, the U.S.A.,
have gone down to 1957 equivalents, and since 1967
work-weeks per year have risen from 43.9 to 47.1. [1]  The
Carter, Reagan and bush years smashed the guarantees
of "The American Way of Life" for many sectors of the
old working-class, but also for the new middle-classes.
Even the yuppies see their expectations betrayed.
Phenomena like homelessness, permanent unemploy-
ment and the "new poverty," as it's called in Europe
(what's "new" about it?), have become widespread in A-
areas.  Even in Switzerland, real wages went down by
5% in 1990, and sociologists found out that 15% of the
population of this model-A+ country live in poverty.
Currently, wages are under heavy attack n Western
Europe, mainly through inflation and tax rises
(Germany).  The bosses tell them to be happy about the
end of "communism" (which never existed) and to be
ready to pay the price.  A strange logic:  "we" win and
get punished for it.  After all, Eastern state-capitalism
was one of _their_ ideas.  The hidden refusal of work
(work less and -- if you can -- spend less) practiced by
A-workers has thinned out profits.  Complaints about
increasing "laziness" can be heard everywhere, even in
Switzerland.  "Post-materialist" attitudes and behaviors
are shared by shadow "silent majorities" in European
countries.  Workers are evasive, minimalist, have "other
interests," retire early, have numerous "psychological"
and "health" problems... and many more excuses not to
be productive.

This "hidden" strike has eroded the centers of the
most advanced capitalist production.  Again one of the
strategies of the counter-attack is "bankruptcy."
Companies just close shop, all the money disappears
(including pension funds) and at the same time the state
that is expected to guarantee the guarantees declares
itself to be in a "budget crisis" and can't pay either.
Budget crises, cuts in social spendings, massive lay-offs,
wage-cuts, all are the common denominator of such dif-
ferent situations as New York or Zurich.  The task of the
current recession -- to get rid of the "fat cats" and to get
the lazy bums with well-paid, part-time jobs jumping --
can easily be seen in the "strange" fact that no govern-
ment is implementing particular anti-cyclical policies.
For the first time, there is no deficit spending to get the
economy running again; actually it's the previous --
fake -- "boom" that has accumulated the biggest
deficits ever.  So there's no money, no place to go, and
old guarantees go down the drain.  Nothing is left
between you and "pure" capital.

Another big change in the functioning of the A-deal
consists in the geographical fragmentation of old
homogenous A-deal areas.  As I already pointed out in
1983, all three deals are present everywhere.  But there
used to be blocs or regions, like North America or
Western Europe, with a certain predominance of the A-
deal.  This antediluvian attempt -- created by Roosevelt
and Stalin in Yalta -- to divide the planetary proletariat
along geographical demarcation lines, has definitely
been undermined by the crisis of the respective deals on
both sides.  This doesn't mean that there will be fewer or
less-pronounced divisions; the end of the divisions
would be the end of the machine.  But what we see now,
more and more, is a kind of leopard-skin pattern of all
the deals.  New York or Los Angeles resemble almost
Third World cities, whereas the center of Rio looks like
a cleaner mid-town Manhattan.  The predominant deal
can differ from one neighborhood to the next.  A-deal
areas become fortresses in a jungle of various C-deals
and some B-deal leftovers.  The price the Machine had to
pay to use the instrument of division called "nation"
(solidified in turn by "blocs"), a certain minimal homo-
geneity of incomes, has obviously risen too high.  There
is no more national economy, just multinational compa-
nies operating all over the planet, wherever profits can
be made the easiest.  The "New World Order" is just the
predator's dream of an unlimited hunting ground.  The
Gulf War was not a national war, but an operation for
the world economy as such.  The U.S. Army was just
hired to do the job:  a new type of planetary Pinkertons.
Living in an A-deal country guarantees less and less --
you can be as poor in the U.S. as in Brazil, or as rich in
India as in Switzerland.

The crisis and dispersion of the deals is transforming
the planetary functioning of the Machine.  Instead of dif-
ferent bosses (or blocs) we're now confronted with
purely anonymous systems of control and sanctions.  Be
it called "free market," "law" (with the U.S. "cops of the
world" to enforce it), "democracy" or "productivity,"
power is exerted over us and by "us" via manifold cir-
cuits of selection and the self-regulating mechanisms for
the allocation of goods.  The typical pseudo-boss struc-
tures of the nineties will be institutions like the IMF, the
World Bank, and certain UN agencies.  There is nowhere
to go to protest; nobody seems in charge, and those who
represent companies or states stand there wringing their
hands, blaming market forces or the deficits.  Ideologists
announce the "end of history," and in a certain sense,
they're right): "their" history is ending, and we never
needed one.

The new leopard-skin geometry of the deals would
seem risky, if the Machine couldn't trust the achieved
social atomization and all the automated barriers of
qualification, lifestyle, income, race and sex.  Living
close together in the same cities and minging on a daily
basis, the single workers behave like little spaceships,
each on its individual couse.  Not afraid of organization-
al short-circuits between these atoms, the Machine can
give them a kind of micro-autonomy, and dissipate deci-
sion-making all over the pattern.  No "ruling" is needed
to be in power.  But "things" happen...

While there is no use to weep about the old deals,
the new menu of deals looks even less appetizing.  There
is no way back -- we're out in the open and a ferocious
wind blows.  We must choose now if we want to duck
and hide in our precarious shelters, or if we use the wind
for our purposes -- to fly kites or propel our sail boats.
To the new geometry of the Machine we can answer
with a new proletarian geometry, taking advantage of
the new possibilities.  With the collaspe of socialism not
only ideolgical mystifications have vanished, but new
contacts with hundreds of millions of ex-B-workers
have become possible.  The migrations of C-workes to
the North bring numerous fresh encounters and cultural
exchanges.

The "end of history" and the fact that we all now face
the same bosses (or boss-mechanisms) can bring togeth-
er workers of the most different backgrounds, and can
help to get rid of all the smoke screen illusions about
progress and politics.  The next time -- _this_ time -- we
aren't going to play around with replacing (powerless)
governments and tinkering with legitimation and repre-
sentation; we're ging to deal with the _real_ thing.
Instead of waiting for the next recovery, we can build
our own circuits of survival.  Why wait for the next job?
Why not use our creative potentials for ourselves?  Must
the East really wait for economic help from the West?
Can't farmers and city-dwellers just organize and create
self-sufficient country or city communities?

The new migrations greatly facilitate what I called
"dysco" (solidarity and commuication across deal-bar-
riers).  On cultural and neighborhood levels, many initia-
tives have grown in the past years.  It is exactly the issue
of "land" (housing, social spaces) that has brought
together workers of different deals.  Land-prices and
therefore rents have been used all over the planet to
restructure territories, to push out unproductive people,
and to create the new cocoon-type housing facilities for
some A-workers ("gentrification").  But, even for them,
rents have become unbearable, and so some common
activity is possible.  Not surprisingly, the Machine is try-
ing to use all kinds of racist and xenophobic resentments
to block such dyscos.  It has even unearthed the most
ridiculous nationalisms -- especially in Eastern Europe
-- to spoil the newly possible dysco parties.  It tries to
divert the struggle for land from itself and pit workers
against workers.

The distribution of different deals in the form of
smaller pockets makes the mechanism of the Machine
more flexible, disperses risks of big "accidents," gener-
ally increases the "heat" and overall productivity.  while
it tries to get away from many more "natural" limits (via
genetic engineering, cyborgs, virtual realities, fusion
and/or solar energy) it is still vulnerable.  The ultimate
"vision" of a sterile, immune self-reproducing automa-
ton living on decaying human and natural compost --
the A-deal Cyborg-Machine reducing the rest of the uni-
verse to mere C-deal waste -- is not yet real.  But the
road is open.

There are strategic possibilities for the new proletarian
geometricians to stop this automatopia from happening.
for example, the Machine is still dependent on petrole-
um, and vital sources of this basic energy commodity lie
exactly in areas where new "fundamentalist" movements
are virulent:  in the Near and Middle East and the ex-
U.S.S.R.  Oil and land will be the key words for the con-
structive forces of refusal ("cnfusal?") of the Machine.  If
metropolitan _dyscos_ could dirrectly cooperate with the
"fundamentalist" C-deal refusers in those areas, the
Machine could be slowly paralyzed, some usable wealth
could be funnelled to the South via the last petro-dollars,
and the land left by the retreating Machine be used for the
production of life and communal sovereignty.  Sure, the
Gulf War was a kind of preventive blow to such thoughts.
But there's always another chance.

A common program for all the "confusers" -- a hid-
den anti-economic agenda -- can be found in the strug-
gles themselves.  The words "proletarian geometry" sug-
gest a program:  "proletarian" is derived from Latin _pro-
les_, meaning "children"; "geometry" contains _gaia_
("earth") and _meter_ ("measure," "middle"), but also
"mother" (as in "metropolis").  The "children of mother
earth" claiming their right to live -- what else could it
be about?  The reason for the unreasonable behavior of
workers is (In Machine-language): better reproduction,
higher "social costs" -- life itself?

In a certain way, our hidden program is therefore
"matriarchal," and surely anti-patriarchal.  This program
is very old; it's actually the _original_ program, the history
of ancient struggles.  New research suggests that the
beginning of the present patriarchal Machine is not just
lost in mythological mists, but that it started around
3000 B.C., as desperate tribes invaded formerly matriar-
chal civilizations.[2]  Correcting my sloppy remarks about
the beginning of centralized domination, it becomes
clear that matriarchy created urban cultures of high
diversification, and without the tyrannies of the later
"asiatic mode of production."  The palaces of Chatal
Hüyük (7000 B.C.) and Knossos (ending 1400 B.C.) are
vast, but not intimidatingly monumental; they show no
signs of fortifications, but express urban wealth and joy
of life.  They prove that non-patriarchal cultures needn't
be dull, rural or "hapily" stagnant.  They were in full
technological and social development (on another path
of progress) when the patriarchal "accident" happened.
Centralized systems of command were also used in
matriarchal societies in times of emergency or natural
catastrophe, as a kind of exceptional criss management.
As soon as things went back to normal, the center of
power dissolved, and the regular procedures of "slow"
and "communal" rule resumed.  Now it seems that
around 3000 B.C. a drought in Inner asia produced a
prolonged period of stress and migrations.  For many
peoples (later known as "Indo-Europeans"), adaptation
to the new climate wasn't possible, so they started prey-
ing on agricultural societies in Mesopotamia, India and
Eurasia.  This, in turn, produced emergency rules in
those societies and a process of mutual "patriarchaliza-
tion" that couldn't be reversed -- till now.  So what
we're dealing with at the moment is nothing else than a
temporary anomaly within the normal matriarchal
course of human affairs.  (When Marx talks about "his-
toric necessity," he's just rationalizing this abnormal
state of emergency:  8000 years of matriarchy versus
3000 years of patriarchy.)




